Start updating BLD notes (#32)
tekknolagi/isdt: lecture-notes/3-bld.md

well understood. Its interface is well understood, too; people who know Make
are at home in most other projects that use Make. Not so for a custom shell
script.

### Variables

Up until now we have written rules and filenames and commands as constants in
the Makefile. This means that if you ever had to reference a file `foo.c` more
than once in the Makefile, you would have to copy around the text. Fortunately,
like other programming languages, Make provides variables.

User-defined variables come in two forms in Make: *simply expanded* variables
use `NAME := val` syntax and *recursively expanded* variables use `NAME = val`
syntax. You will likely not want to use recursively expanded variables much, if
at all, as they have different semantics than in other programming languages:

> **Simply expanded** means that variable references and function calls on the

Reviewer: nit: should we hyphenate "simply-expanded"?

Author: no idea. if this is correct, please say so

> right hand side happen when the variable is *defined* (in the *read-in* phase).

Reviewer: Is this the first time we use the term "read-in phase"? If so, might want to replace it with something more self-explanatory like "when the Makefile is initially parsed (before any recipes run)".

Author: likely; was planning on saying something like "more about this later" since it's coming right up

Expansions of both kinds of variables can occur anywhere, and use `$(VAR)`
syntax.

In the below example, we have a mix of simply and recursively expanded
variables. `LOG_TARGET` is recursively expanded (note the `=`) and `CFLAGS` is
simply expanded (note the `:=`).

```make
LOG_TARGET = echo "Current target: $@" ; echo "Prerequisites: $^"
CFLAGS := -Wall
CFLAGS := $(CFLAGS) -Werror
main: main.o log.o
	$(LOG_TARGET)
	gcc $(CFLAGS) $^ -o $@
main.o: main.c log.h
	$(LOG_TARGET)
	gcc $(CFLAGS) -c $< -o $@
log.o: log.c log.h
	$(LOG_TARGET)
	gcc $(CFLAGS) -c $< -o $@
```

Because `LOG_TARGET` is recursively expanded, it is expanded at each use site
in the Makefile: in `main`, in `main.o`, and in `log.o`. Every time it is
expanded, the variable references inside it see the automatic variables (those
funky-looking variables) local to that rule.

Speaking of automatic variables...

### Automatic variables

Similar to how C gives you `__FILE__` and `__LINE__` and `__func__`, Make also
defines some variables for you within rules. These special variables are called
*automatic variables* and help refer to different parts of the rule so you, the
programmer, don't repeat yourself too much.

> There are many automatic variables, particuarly in the GNU implementation of

Reviewer: Should we link to the GNU docs that have the full list here? Can't remember if that's our practice in lecture notes or not.

Make, but you will probably see these three the most: `$@`, `$^`, and `$<`. In
order:

> * `$@` refers to the name of the target. In our example above, this is used in

Reviewer: s/name/filename/? It's very common for beginners to not realize that every target is a file by default. (`.PHONY` excepted, of course.)

Author: maybe "--the filename"

  the `gcc` invocations to provide an output filename for the `-o` option. In
  the `main` rule, `$@` expands to `main`, in the `main.o` rule it expands to
  `main.o`, etc.
* `$^` refers to the names of all of the prerequisites, separated by spaces. In
  the `main` rule, for example, it refers to `main.o log.o`. It is used here to
  provide the names of all of the object files to GCC so they can be linked
  together. It is *not* used in the `.o` rules because generally you do not
  pass `.h` files to the compiler (they are `include`d).
* `$<` <!-- TODO -->

### Simple vs recursive expansion
### Functions

> ### Make variables and functions are textual

Reviewer: Should definitely talk about how quoting differs/interacts between Make and shell in this section.

also adds some metadata about what kind of file it is and what functions are
where. All this together is called an *object file*---a `.o` file.

### Linking

<!-- from https://joellaity.com/2020/01/25/linking.html -->
<img src="{{site.baseurl}}/assets/images/linking.jpg" style="max-width: 400px;" />

Object files are not complete programs. They cannot be run on their own, even
if they have a `main` function. Some object files also have dependencies on
external functions that have not been resolved yet---functions like `printf`
and `fabs`. In order to call these functions, the object file must be given the
addresses of the other functions. This proecss is called *linking* and it
produces an executable file.

The above diagram with `main.cc` and `square.cc` (C++ files, not C files, but
same idea) can be compiled two ways, both with the same outcome. The first way
is as the diagram shows: separate compilation.

```console
$ c++ main.cc -c  # compile
$ c++ square.cc -c  # compile
$ c++ main.o square.o  # link
```

The second way does everything in one go:

```console
$ c++ main.cc square.cc  # compile and link
```

> 

Author: Add more detail about how linking works

Author: Also add notes about what the point is

and `fabs`. In order to call these functions, the object file must be given the
addresses of the other functions. This proecss is called *linking* and it
produces an executable file.

The above diagram with `main.cc` and `square.cc` (C++ files, not C files, but
same idea) can be compiled two ways, both with the same outcome. The first way
is as the diagram shows: separate compilation.

```console?prompt=$
$ c++ main.cc -c  # compile
$ c++ square.cc -c  # compile
$ c++ main.o square.o  # link
```

This is the way we have been building programs in our Makefiles throughout
this module. Now you know what the compilation does but there is still this
mysterious step that combines object files.

Let's figure out what is going on by experimenting a little bit.

```c
// main.c
#include <stdio.h>

extern int random_number();

int main() {
  printf("Your random number is: %d\n", random_number());
}
```

```c
// lib.c
int random_number() {
  return 4;
}
```

```console?prompt=$
$ gcc -Os -c main.c
$ objdump -M intel --disassemble=main main.o
0000000000000000 <main>:
   0:	f3 0f 1e fa          	endbr64
   4:	50                   	push   rax
   5:	31 c0                	xor    eax,eax

>    7:	e8 00 00 00 00       	call   c <main+0xc>

Author: can we do something with `nm`?

Author: or `readelf -s | grep UND`

  provide the names of all of the object files to GCC so they can be linked
  together. It is *not* used in the `.o` rules because generally you do not
  pass `.h` files to the compiler (they are `include`d).
* `$<` refers to the name of the first prerequisite. You can infer from this
  that generally people write C Makefiles in a way that makes this variable
  useful:
	```make
	main.o: main.c main.h
		gcc -c $<
	```
  Both `main.c` and `main.h` are prerequisites for `main.o`, but because
  `main.c` is listed as the first prerequisite, it can be referred to by `$<`

>   in the build recipe.

Reviewer: Maybe a footnote explaining why the .h files don't need to be listed in the command explicitly?

See [the GNU Make
documentation](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/html_node/Automatic-Variables.html)
for more automatic variables.

> ### Functions

Reviewer: Can we push this to a later lecture?

x := $(filter %.c,$(srcs))
```

You'll usually use functions when specifying variables, targets, or
prerequisites: inside a recipe itself, it's almost always better to use the
shell to do any text processing you need. <!-- TODO: add a footnote explaining
why -->

Function invocations take one or more comma-separated arguments, which is what
distinguishes them from variable expansions. They otherwise have identical
`$()` syntax.

Functions are are (in general) evaluated the same way as variables are
expanded---at the time they're used in a rule or a `:=` assignment.

### Make variables and functions are textual

From reading about variable expansions and function expansions and the various
phases of everything, you may have gotten the feeling that, similar to the C
preprocessor and shell, everything is textual. You would be correct.

Like the shell, Make has no concept of data types. Everything is text, and
Make's minimal escaping and tolerance for spaces can lead to some pretty odd
constructs. The following is taken verbatim from the GNU Make manual:

```make
comma:= ,
empty:=
space:= $(empty) $(empty)
foo:= a b c
bar:= $(subst $(space),$(comma),$(foo))
# bar is now 'a,b,c'.
```

> We will leave you to marinate with that one.

Reviewer: "ruminate on"?

## Lecture 3

You've learned about variables and some built-in functions. With just that, you
can write quite a reasonable Makefile for a little project. But you will soon
find yourself wanting features like the following.

### Pattern rules

Similar to the patterns you saw in `patsubst`, rules can have patterns. To
specify a pattern rule, use `%` somewhere in the target name. For example:

```make
%.o: %.c %.h
	gcc -c $< -o $@
```

In this rule, the `%` matches any (non-empty) text before `.o` and is called
the *stem*. This means it will match any target like `a.o`, `foo.o`, etc. When
it matches, Make substitutes the stem (`a` or `foo`) in the `%` in the
prerequisites as well.

<!-- TODO(tom): clarify whether multi-target pattern rules are different from
normal "multi-target" rules. they seem different?? -->

In these pattern rules, automatic variables do not only remain convenient; they
are also a necessity.

### Implicit rules

If you have ever had `foo.c` sitting around and no Makefile yet, but

> accidentally run `make`, you may have noticed Make... still do something? This

Reviewer: "still does"

is because of *implicit rules*. These "implicit rules" are automatically
present any time you run `make` even if you don't have a Makefile at all!

Make already knows how to compile C, C++, Fortran, and many other languages:
inside Make are built-in pattern rules for common file extensions (e.g. `.c`,
`.cpp`, `.o`).

Because they are built-in, they support limited customization. If the implicit

> rule makes use of variables (such as `CC`, `CFLAGS`, and `LDFLAGS`), then you

Reviewer: Talk about how to figure out if an implicit rule uses variables? I generally just hope the Make docs are correct/complete, which they usually are but sometimes aren't. But perhaps there's an easy-to-understand source of truth that would be a better reference?

Author: demo reading docs and reading source to verify; that's the point of the class

binary and still planning on using the implicit rule, you must make sure that
the target matches at least one of the `.o` dependencies or the rule won't
match:

```make
hello: hello.o world.o foo.o bar.o
```

Because `hello` shares a stem with `hello.o`, the rule will match. Also note
that all of the other `.o` files are not the target of any rule! They use the
implicit `%.o: %.c` pattern rule.

#### Pitfalls

It's not all fun and rainbows. Implicit rules are convenient, and you should
use them if you want, but remember the following:

* Header files not automatic prerequisites (but you can add them yourself, as
  above)
* Implicit rules are not explicit, which some people and projects value

So they may not be the best for you and your team.

### Silencing commands

Build output can be noisy. When you run a command anywhere in a Makefile, Make
prints the command (not its output---the command itself) before running it.
This can be useful for debugging, but sometimes the command's only purpose is
to print something else (e.g. `echo`). In this case, it's not helpful. To
prevent the command from being printed, preface its line in your recipe with

> `@`.

Reviewer: Might be a good place to also mention the `-` prefix, which makes a failure of that command non-fatal.

$ make mytarget
hello
$
```

### `?=` and `+=` assignment

We already saw `=` (recursively expanded) and `:=` (simply expanded)
assignments for variables. Now we are going to look at `?=` and `+=`.

**`?=` assignment**:

* Only sets the variable if it hasn't been defined yet
* Doesn't override variables that have been defined, *even if they're empty*
* Is always recursively-expanded

**`+=` assignment**:

* Appends the given text to the end of an existing variable
* If not yet defined, is recursively-expanded; otherwise, is expanded as
  specified by the previous definition

The `+=` assignment is useful for building up lists of things in a Makefile.
That's pretty much only what we've seen it used for.

The `?=` assignment is excellent for allowing the person running `make` to
customize the execution of the Makefile without editing it. Speaking of
which...

### Variables, overrides, and the environment

<!-- TODO -->

#### Environment variables

You learned about environment variables in the command-line module. They are a
great way to pass around snippets of data between programs. As such, they are
commonly used in Make. Make even *imports all environment variables* as Make

> variables. For example, if you have the following Makefile:

Reviewer: TODO for @tchebb: remind myself of the nuances here so I can review this section more thoroughly

you can use `HELLO` as a Make variable.

In short, when using environment variables in commands such as `export CFLAGS=-g ; make hello`:

> * The shell runs make with `CFLAGS` set in the environment

Reviewer: Maybe say "the variables (in this case, `CFLAGS`)" so that it's clear `CFLAGS` is part of the example?

* Make imports all environment variables as Make variables
* However, assignments in the Makefile override environment variables! `=` and
  `:=` replace them entirely, while `+=` appends to them

So, for example, the following Makefile overrides the environment variable:

```make
.PHONY: all

> HELLO:=Max

Reviewer: Do we want a convention with spaces around the assignment? That's what I typically see, but I'm fine either way as long as we're consistent.

Author: TODO mention whitespace stripping on left and right

all:

> 	echo $(HELLO)

Reviewer: Can put an @ here for better output and a nice callback to the last section :)

```

```console
$ HELLO=Tom make
echo Max
Max
$
```

#### Variable overrides

Variable overrides are different. While environment variables allow for
customization from the outside, variable overrides are a feature of Make that
let the user forcibly change variable values.

This means that making changes to variables need not involve mucking around
inside a Makefile and finding all places where a variable is initialized.
Instead, you can decide once and for all what the value should be when invoking
`make`.

Imagine using someone else's Makefile where they have hard-coded `CC:=gcc` at
the top. No need to edit; run `make CC=clang` and enjoy using your compiler of
choice.

In short, when using variable overrides in commands such as `make CFLAGS=-g hello`:

> * The shell does *not* use an environment variable: the shell passes the string

Reviewer: "does not use" is a bit imprecise wording. Maybe say something like "Due to its position after the command name, the shell treats `CFLAGS=-g` as just another argument to pass to Make. In other words, no shell variable ever gets set—Make is what interprets the variable assignment."

  `CFLAGS=-g` as an argument to `make`, which parses it
* Make sets the given variable to the given value
* Causes *all* assignments in Makefile to that variable (`=`, `:=`, and `+=`)
  to be ignored

So, for example, the following Makefile's `HELLO` value is ignored in favor of
the override:

```make
.PHONY: all
HELLO:=Max
all:
	echo $(HELLO)
```

```console
$ make HELLO=Tom
echo Max

> Max

Reviewer: Shouldn't these say Tom?

$
```

### Implicit variables

Some variables used by implicit rules, like `CC` (the C compiler) have default
values (`CC`, for example, defaults to `"cc"`). While they exist for use
primarily in implicit rules, they also have values all throughout the Makefile;
use them as you see fit.

They are different than "normal" variables in two ways:

* These default values have lower precedence than environment variables

> * Can be overridden by the environment or an assignment in your Makefile

Reviewer: s/Can/They can/

So, for example, the following Makefile's (default, implicit) `CC` value of

> `"cc"` is ignored in favor of the environment variable:

Reviewer: Maybe an example of just running `make` to show that it outputs `cc` by default? Unless you think that's too verbose.

.PHONY: all
CC:=rainbowcc
all:
	echo $(CC)
```

```console
$ make
echo rainbowcc
rainbowcc
$
```

### "multi-target" rules

<!-- TODO -->

### .DEFAULT_GOAL

Until now, we have been using this `.PHONY` target `all` and haven't talked
about it one bit. You may have wondered to yourself what it does. Does it run
all the targets? Is it just the name of one target? You may have wondered if it
was a quirk of this course, convention, or perhaps even hard-coded into Make
itself. Let's take a look and see if we can figure it out.

If we write a Makefile with one target named `all`:

```make
.PHONY: all
all:
	echo Hello from all
```

and run `make`:

```console
$ make
echo Hello from all
Hello from all
$
```

As you might have expected, it runs the `all` target. Okay, let's try adding
another target and see if that runs too:

```make
.PHONY: all something
all:
	echo Hello from all

something:
	echo Hello from something
```

and run `make`:

```console
$ make
echo Hello from all
Hello from all
$
```

So it seems as though it really is the name of a target. What happens if we
re-order the targets:

```make
.PHONY: all something
all:
	echo Hello from all

something:
	echo Hello from something

> ```

Reviewer: Not actually reordered?

> ### Compilation

Reviewer: Let's frame this section/lecture by explicitly stating that we've been talking about `.o` files and linking without really diving into what happens under the hood, and that this section's purpose is to go back and explain that rather than to introduce new build system concepts.

You might notice that our chosen variable names are gone (no more `x` and we
have these funky-looking `eax`, `edi`, `.LBB0_1`, etc), there is no more
obvious math (`x * factorial(x - 1)` is also gone), and the instructions appear
to be a bit more regular looking... more linear. There is no `if` and there are
no curly braces... instead, there are only jump instructions and labels. These

> are the qualities that people normally ascribe to lower-level languages.

Reviewer: Can this whole paragraph be a footnote? It's not directly related to the thrust of our point, which is the difference between compilation and linking.

Author: I think I should go into more lurid detail for linking so that they can form some kind of (potentially vague) distinction between the two

Once the assembly has been generated, Clang has an assembler that turns the
text assembly instructions into machine code---unreadable bits and bytes. It
also adds some metadata about what kind of file it is and what functions are
where. All this together is called an *object file*---a `.o` file.

### Linking

<!-- from https://joellaity.com/2020/01/25/linking.html -->
<img src="{{site.baseurl}}/assets/images/linking.jpg" style="max-width: 400px;" />

Object files are not complete programs. They cannot be run on their own, even

> if they have a `main` function. Some object files also have dependencies on

Reviewer: "Object files, unlike executables, may depend on external…"

Author: Object files commonly have dependencies

also adds some metadata about what kind of file it is and what functions are
where. All this together is called an *object file*---a `.o` file.

> <!-- TODO(max): Add section diagram for ELF? -->

Reviewer: Make sure to mention that sections and segments are different things, even though most tooling likes to pretend that segments don't exist.

same idea) can be compiled two ways, both with the same outcome. The first way
is as the diagram shows: separate compilation.

```console?prompt=$
$ c++ main.cc -c  # compile
$ c++ square.cc -c  # compile
$ c++ main.o square.o  # link
```

This is the way we have been building programs in our Makefiles throughout

> this module. Now you know what the compilation does but there is still this
> mysterious step that combines object files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this module: each C file gets compiled into an object file as just described, and then
somehow they're combined into an executable program. Let's try to demystify what
happens there with some experiments:
```

Let's figure out what is going on by experimenting a little bit.

```c
// main.c
#include <stdio.h>

extern int random_number();

int main() {
  printf("Your random number is: %d\n", random_number());
}
```

```c
// lib.c
int random_number() {
  return 4;
}
```

```console?prompt=$

> $ gcc -Os -c main.c

Reviewer: Is the assembly a lot worse without `-Os`? If we can avoid flag salad, we should as much as possible.

Author: flag salad is healthy. you need the fiber

> $ objdump -M intel --disassemble=main main.o

Reviewer: Can we do this without `-M intel` for the same reason as above? I know most folks prefer Intel syntax, but I think showing simple commands with "no tricks up our sleeve" is more valuable here.

0000000000000000 <main>:
   0:	f3 0f 1e fa          	endbr64
   4:	50                   	push   rax
   5:	31 c0                	xor    eax,eax
   7:	e8 00 00 00 00       	call   c <main+0xc>
   c:	48 8d 35 00 00 00 00 	lea    rsi,[rip+0x0]        # 13 <main+0x13>
  13:	bf 01 00 00 00       	mov    edi,0x1
  18:	89 c2                	mov    edx,eax
  1a:	31 c0                	xor    eax,eax
  1c:	e8 00 00 00 00       	call   21 <main+0x21>
  21:	31 c0                	xor    eax,eax
  23:	5a                   	pop    rdx
  24:	c3                   	ret
$
```

In particular, it's important to note that the address for the function

> `random_number` is just `0`. You can see this by looking at the `call`

Reviewer: Think we've gotta make this bold or at least reference the specific line, or else it'll fly over most students' heads.

Reviewer: Never mind, you do this right after.

instruction (the x86 opcode for this particular kind of call is `e8` and can be
found at offset `7`).

`e8 00 00 00 00` seems a little silly to me. What are the odds that the address

> of `random_number` just happens to be `0`? Isn't that supposed to be

Reviewer: Technically offset not address, so the `NULL` comparison isn't quite apt.

Author: ok relative displacement. kills my argument for printf too. but i don't know how to illustrate that the text *doesn't* have the target address in there

invalid---`NULL`, even? Also, look at the address for `printf` (offset `1c`).
That is a different function and yet the code seems to be using the same
address for calling both.

Last, you may have noticed that we compiled an object file for `main.c`
*without compiling or referencing `lib.c`*! Unlike in some languages with
extensive module systems, there is no such transitive compilation in C. We said

> "compile `main.c`" and GCC did that... and only that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"compile `main.c`", so that's all GCC did.
```

> So there's actually no way these could be the right addresses because the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `lib.c` hasn't been compiled yet, it's actually impossible for these to be the right addresses: the
```

$ c++ main.o square.o  # link
```

This is the way we have been building programs in our Makefiles throughout this
module: each C file gets compiled into an object file as just described, and
then somehow they're combined into an executable program. Let's try to
demystify what happens there with some experiments:

> Let's figure out what is going on by experimenting a little bit. We'll write a

Reviewer: First sentence redundant with last paragraph

main file that calls a function to generate a random number and then print it:

```c
// main.c
#include <stdio.h>

int random_number();

int main() {
  printf("Your random number is: %d\n", random_number());
}
```

Note that instead of having a header file, we are instead writing `int
random_number();`. This is equvialent to `#include`ing a header file that has
the same declaration because an `#include` is equvialent to copy-and-pasting
the header into the C file.

We'll also write a little library to generate "random" numbers.

```c
// lib.c
int random_number() {
  return 4;
}
```

We can compile the `main.o` object by running `gcc` with the `-c` flag, as you
have seen before:

> (Note that I am using `-Os`, which indicates to GCC that it should try and

> > produce shorter code. It's not required; it's just for presentation. Also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> produce shorter code. It's not required; it's just to make the assembly more human-readable. Also
```

$
```

In particular, it's important to note that the offset for the function
`random_number` is all `0`s. You can see this by looking at the `call`
instruction (the x86 opcode for this particular kind of call is `e8` and can be
found at offset `7`). The `e8` call opcode is a *relative call*, meaning that

> it takes an offset as its argument. In this case, it's `0xc` because `e8`

Reviewer: Technically this isn't the argument to the *opcode*. That's zero. `0xc` is the argument to the *mnemonic*, which is subtly different.

takes an offset relative to the next instruction (not an absolute address) and
the next instruction begins at `0xc`.

It's probably not the case that GCC dumped the body of `random_number` into the
`main` function. It's impossible, actually, since we compiled `main.c` in
isolation---we did not give GCC the code for `lib.c` in our compile command.
Same thing with `printf` (at code offset `0x1c`). So something must be afoot...
perhaps the it's a placeholder value.

Because `lib.c` hasn't been compiled yet, it's impossible these offsets to be
accurate: the compiler has no way of knowing where the code to `random_number`
or `printf` lives. All it knows about `random_number` is that it will
eventually be provided by some other object file (or it will fail to link).

> And yep, if we request an executable, it fails to link:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And yep, if we ask GCC to make an executable, it fails to link:
```

The second one is that the offset for calling `random_number` changed. The
zero offset got filled in and is now `0d 01 00 00` (and therefore the text
representation on the right changed too to point at `0x1179`, somewhere shortly
after the end of `main`). Since x86 is "little endian", this number is
`0x010d`, or 269 bytes after the next instruction (`0x106c+0x010d=0x1179`).

We can check this by looking at the disassembly (and address) of the
`random_number` function. Sure enough, it's at `0x1179`:

```console?prompt=$
$ objdump -M intel --disassemble=random_number ./a.out
0000000000001179 <random_number>:
    1179:	f3 0f 1e fa          	endbr64
    117d:	b8 04 00 00 00       	mov    eax,0x4
    1182:	c3                   	ret
$
```

Last, we notice that the call to `printf` changed to this weird
`__printf_chk@plt` thing. We're going to mostly gloss over that and say "it's
dynamically linked", which means that at program start time, the loader will
find and set the real address for `printf`.

If you're curious, you can see what happens when we statically link our program
with `-static`, which means that we want to bundle `printf` (and other normally

> dynamically linked libraries) alongside it:

Reviewer: I think static linking should be a footnote. It's enough of a digression to not spend time on, IMO.

Author: footnoted
